#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass article
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme times
\graphics default
\paperfontsize 10
\spacing single 
\papersize a4paper
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 1
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\leftmargin 2.5cm
\topmargin 3cm
\rightmargin 2.5cm
\bottommargin 2.5cm
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip smallskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle empty

\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
pagestyle{empty}
\layout Title


\noun on 
An Alternative For The UNIX Directory Structure
\layout Author

Hisham Muhammad\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
André Detsch
\newline 

\layout Date

Programa de Pós-Graduação em Computação Aplicada - PIPCA 
\newline 
Centro de Ciências Exatas e Tecnológicas
\newline 
UNISINOS - Universidade do Vale do Rio dos Sinos
\newline 
São Leopoldo - RS - Brasil
\newline 

\family sans 
\size small 
{hisham,detsch}@exatas.unisinos.br
\family default 
\size default 

\newline 

\layout Standard


\series bold 
Abstract.

\series default 
 This work proposes the GoboLinux directory hierarchy, as a new tree for
 
\noun on 
unix
\noun default 
-based operating systems, such as Linux.
 Highlights of this new approach are a greater functional organization and
 takes advantage of installation from source code to provide a improved
 software management, making the structure of packages explicit in the directory
 tree.
\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
thispagestyle{empty}
\layout Section

Introduction
\layout Standard

The UNIX operating system was first used on environments where users accessed
 a central application server through terminal stations with low (or no)
 storage capacity.
 A number of characteristics of this system, most notably the data organization
 structured as a directory tree, reflect this history.
 The storage model based on trees proves to be adequate to this day; however,
 the logic behind the UNIX directory hierarchy is based on premises that
 no longer correspond to the reality of the most existing Linux installations.
 The Linux operating system is getting wider use on personal stations which
 execute and store the user's applications.
 In this context, there is no 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

application server
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

, and still, conventions such as the existence of different repositories
 for libraries persist (
\family typewriter 
/lib
\family default 
, 
\family typewriter 
/usr/lib
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
/usr/local/lib
\family default 
).
\layout Standard

Because of the fast pace of development in the Free Software community (
 
\emph on 

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

release early, release often
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 


\emph default 
 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Raymond2001}

\end_inset 

), the process of installing and removing programs became common and frequent.
 This is very different from the scenario on which the criteria for the
 UNIX directory hierarchy (still used by the Linux distributions) were based
 upon.
 These criteria do not take into account the needs of today's reality; it
 becomes interesting to reevaluate them and seek an alternative.
\layout Standard

This paper presents a directory tree that was conceived from the needs and
 usage patterns of modern Linux systems and retains compatibility with the
 UNIX legacy.
 Initially, aspects of the classic hierarchy are discussed (Section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:Atual}

\end_inset 

).
 Next, an overview of the approaches employed in directory trees of other
 systems is presented (Section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:Outros}

\end_inset 

).
 Section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:Gobo}

\end_inset 

 describes the devised hierarchy, while Section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:Experiencia}

\end_inset 

 reports experiences related to the use of this model.
 Finally, Section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:Concl}

\end_inset 

 concludes the paper.
\layout Section

Characteristics of the current hierarchy
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sec:Atual}

\end_inset 


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{-0.2cm}
\layout Standard

In the UNIX tree, directories serve two purposes: differentiate categories
 of files and differentiate their location in the network.
 Files of the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

executable
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 category from all applications are stored in six directories: 
\family typewriter 
/bin
\family default 
, 
\family typewriter 
/usr/bin
\family default 
, 
\family typewriter 
/usr/local/bin
\family default 
, 
\family typewriter 
/sbin
\family default 
, 
\family typewriter 
/usr/sbin
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
/usr/local/sbin
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

files from the X Window System are, historically, an exception to this rule,
 possessing an entire UNIX-like hierarchy under 
\family typewriter 
/usr/X11R6
\end_float 
, where the criteria of choice to determine which of those six directories
 is used for a given file is its physical location (local or remote).
 Still, some programs are installed in other locations than those dictated
 by the above rules.
 For instance, the File System Hierarchy standard has an arbitrary list
 of which executable files should be stored at the 
\family typewriter 
/bin
\family default 
 directory.
\layout Standard

Some programs assume that certain files are stored in specific locations
 (for example, 
\family typewriter 
/lib/cpp
\family default 
, 
\family typewriter 
/usr/bin/python
\family default 
).
 This is a source of incompatibilities, even between different Linux distributio
ns that follow the traditional model of directories.
 But the biggest problem caused by this approach is the difficulty in the
 removal of programs, since files of different applications are mixed in
 the same directories and different files from a single application are
 spread throughout a number of directories.
\layout Standard

The solution used by companies and organizations that develop Linux distribution
s in order to maintain a correspondence between individual files and application
s is 
\emph on 

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

package managing
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 


\emph default 
, that is, installing and removing software using a program that maintains
 a database that relates existing files in the system to the applications
 from which they were originated.
 The main limitation of this method is the fact that installation of application
s from source code generates inconsistencies in the database.
\layout Standard

A common practice is to keep the 
\family typewriter 
/usr
\family default 
 hierarchy maintained by the package manager and target the installation
 of programs compiled locally to 
\family typewriter 
/usr/local
\family default 
.
 This keeps the database consistent, but does not solve the issue on how
 to remove programs installed from source.
\layout Standard

The UNIX hierarchy standard defined an extra directory, 
\family typewriter 
/opt
\family default 
, to allow groups of applications to be installed separately from the rest.
 This can be considered an acknowledgment of the existence of the problems
 enumerated above.
 Even so, this causes a conflict of criteria in the standard itself.
\layout Section

Alternative approaches
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sec:Outros}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Practically all operating systems developed after UNIX use the model of
 directory trees.
 The different organizations applied to the directory hierarchy of those
 systems reflect the changes both in the way how computers are used and
 in their storage capacity.
 Below, we describe the directory trees existing in Mac OS X and AtheOS,
 desktop operating systems that possess a certain degree of UNIX heritage.
\layout Standard

The adoption of a kernel and tools based, respectively, on Mach 3.0 and FreeBSD
 brought to Apple Computer the challenge to combine the UNIX hierarchy with
 a look and feel familiar to Mac OS users.
 Mac OS X (
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Apple2001}

\end_inset 

) uses an uncommon strategy to achieve this feat.
 In the graphical interface, a Macintosh directory tree is presented, containing
 directories such as 
\family typewriter 
/System/Library
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
/Network/
\emph on 
Remote_Station
\family default 
\emph default 
.
 Actually, these directories are a subset of the real directory tree.
 Also, the interface displays some directories in locations other than their
 physical storage points.
 For instance, 
\family typewriter 
/Mac OS X
\family default 
 is a link to the root directory, and some directories, such as 
\family typewriter 
/Applications
\family default 
, appear in the interface as 
\family typewriter 
/Mac OS X/Applications
\family default 
.
 Accessing the file system through a text-based shell, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

hidden
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 UNIX directories such as 
\family typewriter 
/usr
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
/etc
\family default 
 become accessible.
 Note that this approach is only possible in a proprietary environment,
 where the user interface of the system is developed by a single company.
 In a system like Linux, this would be impossible, given the heterogeneity
 of graphical user interfaces available.
\layout Standard

The directory hierarchy of the AtheOS operating system (
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Skauen2002}

\end_inset 

) is partially based on the UNIX tree.
 In AtheOS, for example, the 
\family typewriter 
/usr
\family default 
 directory is used for the intents that, in UNIX, 
\family typewriter 
/opt
\family default 
 is used.
 This is made possible by the establish of the 
\family typewriter 
^
\family default 
 directory convention.
 The AtheOS libraries recognize this as the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

directory where the currently running executable file resides
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

, analogously as 
\family typewriter 
~
\family default 
, the UNIX indicator to the user's home directory.
 Unfortunately, Linux being a UNIX clone, it cannot employ solutions as
 this one, since this causes considerable portability problems (a text-based
 Linux application can be easily ported to AtheOS, but the opposite is not
 true).
\layout Standard

There are programs that try to present alternatives to provide, to some
 degree, a reorganization of the directory hierarchy.
 Two of the most used programs of this kind are 
\emph on 
GNU Stow
\emph default 
 (
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Morin2001}

\end_inset 

) and 
\emph on 
Encap
\emph default 
 (
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Encap2002}

\end_inset 

).
 Both follow the basic idea presented by the 
\emph on 
Depot
\emph default 
 software (
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Colyer1992}

\end_inset 

), developed at Carnegie Mellon.
 The principle is to maintain two directory trees: a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

real
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 one, where the files are sorted by application; and another one, sorted
 in the traditional way, containing links to the files located at the first
 tree
\begin_float footnote 
\layout Standard

The AtheOS operating system uses a similar technique to maintain compatibility
 with UNIX applications
\end_float 
.
 GNU Stow intends to be a simplified alternative to Depot, since, contrary
 to Depot, it does not maintain a database.
 When using Stow, the application should be compiled with paths relative
 to 
\family typewriter 
/usr/local
\family default 
 and installed with paths relative to 
\family typewriter 
/usr/local/stow/
\emph on 
application
\family default 
\emph default 
.
 Encap uses similar systematics, with a rudimentary support for version
 control (the package manager software, 
\emph on 
epkg
\emph default 
, tries to detect versions through the name of the application created under
 
\noun on 
/usr/local/encap
\noun default 
, for example, 
\family typewriter 
sed-2.0
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
sed-3.0.2
\family default 
).
\layout Section

The GoboLinux hierarchy
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sec:Gobo}

\end_inset 


\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{-0.2cm}
\layout Standard

The basic idea behind the GoboLinux hierarchy is to combine ideas from the
 previously presented operating systems and the link system introduced by
 Depot, creating a new hierarchy that maintains total compatibility with
 the UNIX tree.
 Like in Depot, each program (
\emph on 
Gimp
\emph default 
, 
\emph on 
Fileutils
\emph default 
, 
\emph on 
Glibc
\emph default 
, 
\emph on 
Qt
\emph default 
, etc.) is installed in its entirety inside a separate directory.
 Inside this directory, standard UNIX directories are typically created,
 containing the files that in the traditional UNIX directory tree would
 be copied to 
\family typewriter 
/usr/bin
\family default 
 (or 
\family typewriter 
/bin
\family default 
), 
\family typewriter 
/usr/sbin
\family default 
 (or 
\family typewriter 
/sbin
\family default 
), 
\family typewriter 
/usr/lib
\family default 
 (or 
\family typewriter 
/lib
\family default 
), and so on.
\layout Standard

For this purpose, a 
\family typewriter 
/Programs
\family default 
 directory was estabilished, containing a subdirectory for each installed
 program.
 Each of those subdirectories has, on its turn, a subdirectory for each
 version of the specific program, and a link labeled 
\family typewriter 
Current
\family default 
 pointing to the currently used version.
 Each program also has a 
\family typewriter 
Settings
\family default 
 directory storing the program's configuration files (which would be normally
 stored at 
\family typewriter 
/etc
\family default 
).
 Notice that this directory is unique for all versions of the program.
 This design choice eases the version control, since the personal configurations
 are preserved in the event of an upgrade or downgrade.
\layout Standard

Installation of programs from source is made through scripts.
 In the case of programs with configuration files generated using 
\emph on 
GNU autoconf
\emph default 
 (which is the majority of free software packages) the script uses the 
\family typewriter 
--prefix
\family default 
 parameter to define the destination of the files being installed.
 For example, when installing the 
\emph on 
Qt
\emph default 
 library, version 2.3.2, the command configure 
\family typewriter 
--prefix=/Programs/Qt/2.3.3
\family default 
 is automatically executed, and the required directories are created.
 For programs that do not provide this parameter in their configuration
 files, the 
\emph on 
configure
\emph default 
 script (or the 
\emph on 
Makefiles
\emph default 
 themselves) will be adjusted, automatically, through scripts that attempt
 to replace the paths contained in the file; or, in a few cases, manually.
\layout Standard

Once a new version of a program is installed, links are created from each
 file in the application at directories that centralize those links according
 to file types.
 For example, 
\family typewriter 
/System/Links/Executables
\family default 
 stores links for executable files of all programs (contained in the 
\family typewriter 
bin
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
sbin
\family default 
 directories).
 This way, all executables can be called or accessed from a single directory
 (same happening to th libraries, headers and manuals / info files).
 This approach is different from the ones used by the symbolic link management
 systems discussed on Section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:Outros}

\end_inset 

, as the generated links structure does not reflect the UNIX hierarchy,
 but a functional categorization of the links.
\layout Standard

\begin_float fig 
\layout Standard


\family typewriter 
\size footnotesize 
/\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\family default 
Root directory
\layout Standard


\family typewriter 
\size footnotesize 
|--Programs\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\family default 
Programs
\layout Standard


\family typewriter 
\size footnotesize 
|--Mount\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\family default 
Mounting point for additional local or remote filesystems
\layout Standard


\family typewriter 
\size footnotesize 
|--Users\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\family default 
Personal areas for users
\layout Standard


\family typewriter 
\size footnotesize 
|--System\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\layout Standard


\family typewriter 
\size footnotesize 
|\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
|--Boot\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\family default 
Files necessary for booting (
\emph on 
kernel
\emph default 
 and 
\emph on 
bootloader
\emph default 
)
\layout Standard


\family typewriter 
\size footnotesize 
|\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
|--Links\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\layout Standard


\family typewriter 
\size footnotesize 
|\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
|\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
|--Executables\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\family default 
Links to files from the programs' 
\family typewriter 
bin
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
sbin
\family default 
 directories
\layout Standard


\family typewriter 
\size footnotesize 
|\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
|\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
|--Headers\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\family default 
Links to files from the programs' 
\family typewriter 
include
\family default 
 directories
\layout Standard


\family typewriter 
\size footnotesize 
|\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
|\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
|--Libraries\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\family default 
Links to files from the programs' 
\family typewriter 
lib
\family default 
 directories
\layout Standard


\family typewriter 
\size footnotesize 
|\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
|\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\backslash 
--Manuals\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\layout Standard


\family typewriter 
\size footnotesize 
|\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
|\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
|--info\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\family default 
Links to files from the programs' 
\family typewriter 
info
\family default 
 directories
\layout Standard


\family typewriter 
\size footnotesize 
|\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
|\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\backslash 
--man{1-9}\SpecialChar ~

\family default 
Links to files from the programs' 
\family typewriter 
man/man{1-9}
\family default 
 directories
\layout Standard


\family typewriter 
\size footnotesize 
|\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
|--Settings\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\family default 
Configuration files and links to files from 
\family typewriter 
Settings
\family default 
 directories
\layout Standard


\family typewriter 
\size footnotesize 
|\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\backslash 
--Variable\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\family default 
Variable data
\layout Standard


\family typewriter 
\size footnotesize 
|\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\backslash 
--Temp\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\family default 
Temporary files
\layout Standard


\family typewriter 
\size footnotesize 
|--proc\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\family default 
Kernel status files (managed by the 
\emph on 
proc file system
\emph default 
)
\layout Standard


\family typewriter 
\size footnotesize 

\backslash 
--dev\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\family default 
Device files (managed by the 
\emph on 
dev file system
\emph default 
)
\layout Caption

The GoboLinux directory hierarchy
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{fig:gobolinux}

\end_inset 


\end_float 
\layout Standard

Figure 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{fig:gobolinux}

\end_inset 

 describes in greater detail the general directory hierarchy as proposed.
 An important treat of this structure is the nonexistence of a global 
\family typewriter 
share
\family default 
 directory (programs can have their own 
\family typewriter 
share
\family default 
 directories).
 This decision is explained by the fact that, even though the 
\family typewriter 
share
\family default 
 directory permits sharing of data between different applications, in practice
 this directory serves a repository for application-specific files that
 has no place on the UNIX hierarchy (such as icons and fonts).
 This way, we opted not to have a 
\family typewriter 
/System/Links/Shared
\family default 
 directory, because the different share directories of each application
 have no relation between them.
\layout Standard

Compatibility with the UNIX legacy is obtained through creation of extra
 links not present in the above diagram, such as 
\family typewriter 
/etc -> /System/Settings
\family default 
, 
\family typewriter 
/bin -> /System/Links/Executables
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
/lib -> /System/Links/Libraries
\family default 
, mirroring the GoboLinux tree into the UNIX tree.
 Unlike previous proposals that attempted to organize the directory tree
 maintaining historical compatibility, in GoboLinux there is a single point
 for installation of programs, without a legacy tree in parallel.
\layout Section

Experience
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sec:Experiencia}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Practical experience with the directory structure presented in this paper
 can be divided in two parts.
 Firstly, the project was started off with a package based distribution
 which was gradually converted to the GoboLinux tree as the programs were
 updated to new versions.
 In this stage, structural ideas evolved and their validity and viability
 were verified.
\layout Standard

In a second stage, we opted to compile the entire system following the GoboLinux
 hierarchy, intending to have total control of all files installed in the
 machine.
 For such, we used as a basis the documentation created by the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Linux from Scratch
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 project (
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Beekmans2002}

\end_inset 

).
\layout Section

Concluding remarks
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sec:Concl}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

As presented in Section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:Outros}

\end_inset 

, the search for alternatives to reorganize the UNIX directory tree is a
 subject of several projects.
 This paper presented a new proposition for the UNIX directory structure,
 differing from previously existing projects mainly because there is no
 legacy tree coexisting with the main tree, allowing for a greater self-consiste
ncy and elegance.
 Practical experience showed the total viability and compatibility of the
 presented ideas, as well as making evident the benefits brought by this
 new structure.
\layout Standard

Further information about GoboLinux can be obtained at 
\family typewriter 
http://cscience.org/~gobo
\family default 
.
\layout Bibliography
\bibitem {Apple2001}


\size small 
Apple Computer Inc., 
\emph on 

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Inside Mac OS X - System Overview
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 


\emph default 
, ISBN: 1400524806, 292p., Fev.
 2001.
\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{-0.2cm}
\layout Bibliography
\bibitem {Encap2002}


\size small 
\emph on 

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Encap Archive
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 


\emph default 
, Computing and Communications Services Office at the University of Illinois
 at Urbana-Champaign, 
\family typewriter 
http://www.encap.org
\family default 
, 2002.
\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{-0.2cm}
\layout Bibliography
\bibitem {Raymond2001}


\size small 
Eric Raymond, 
\emph on 

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

The Cathedral & The Bazaar
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 


\emph default 
, O'Reilly and Associates, hardback edition, Jan.
 2001.
\layout Bibliography
\bibitem {Morin2001}


\size small 
Guillaume Morin, Bob Glickstein, 
\emph on 

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

GNU Stow
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 


\emph default 
, 
\family typewriter 
http://www.gnu.org/software/stow/stow.html
\family default 
, 2001.
\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{-0.2cm}
\layout Bibliography
\bibitem {Skauen2002}


\size small 
Kurt Skauen, 
\emph on 

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

AtheOS
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 


\emph default 
, 
\family typewriter 
http://www.atheos.cx
\family default 
, 2002.
\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{-0.2cm}
\layout Bibliography
\bibitem {Beekmans2002}


\size small 
Gerard Beekmans
\emph on 
, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Linux From Scratch
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 


\emph default 
, 
\family typewriter 
http://www.linuxfromscratch.org/
\family default 
, acessado em 17/03/2002
\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{-0.2cm}
\layout Bibliography
\bibitem {Colyer1992}


\size small 
Wallace Colyer, Walter Wong, 
\emph on 

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Depot: A Tool for Managing Software Environments
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 


\emph default 
, Usenix LISA VI Conference, 1992.
\latex latex 

\backslash 
vspace{-0.2cm}
\the_end
