#LyX 1.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 221
\textclass article
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme palatino
\graphics default
\paperfontsize 11
\spacing single 
\papersize a4paper
\paperpackage widemarginsa4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

I am not clueless 
\newline 

\size large 
or 
\size default 

\newline 
Myths and misconceptions about the design of GoboLinux
\layout Author

Hisham H.
 Muhammad
\layout Quote
\align right 

\emph on 

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Those who do not understand Unix 
\newline 
are doomed to reinvent it, poorly.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 


\newline 
-- Henry Spencer, 1987
\layout Standard

This week we had another release of GoboLinux, and again a number of people,
 even if indirectly, called me 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

clueless
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 for coming up with such a structure for a Linux distribution, for a number
 of reasons.
 None of those reasons was new; I heard all of them many times.
 This article is an attempt to sum them up, and explain why I chose the
 design decisions I made, hopefully clearing any pending misconceptions.
 I don't have illusion this will prevent them keep happening, but at least
 I'll have a text to point people to.
 This article ranges from common misconceptions from those who have never
 used GoboLinux, to well-intentioned but poorly-thought-out ideas that keep
 coming from time to time to the GoboLinux mailing list, often causing long
 debates.
 I'll be separating the points in sections and they are meant to be self-contain
ed, so feel free to skip directly to the ones that interest you, if you
 don't feel like reading the whole thing.
\layout Section*


\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

There is a reason why things are the way they are
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

This is something I hear constantly, often followed by an explanation about
 the difference between 
\family typewriter 
/
\family default 
, 
\family typewriter 
/usr
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
/usr/local
\family default 
, and/or 
\family typewriter 
/bin
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
/sbin
\family default 
.
 I do understand the difference
\begin_inset Foot
collapsed true

\layout Standard

For those who always wondered (and those who want to check if I really understan
d the difference), the three main trees divide, respectively, files that
 need to be available in the root partition for single-user rescue mode,
 program files managed by the distribution, and programs added separately
 by the site admin (this distinction varies on different Unices, but this
 is mainly how it works on Linux distributions, read on for more).
 Regular programs go in 
\family typewriter 
/bin
\family default 
, and programs intended for the superuser in 
\family typewriter 
/sbin
\family default 
.
\end_inset 

.
 If I did away with this three-level distinction, is because I believe there
 are other ways to approach the problems this distinction tries to solve.
 In a GoboLinux system, the argument for having separate 
\family typewriter 
/usr
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
/usr/local
\family default 
 trees in order to separate programs shipped by the distribution and compiled
 by the user clearly does not hold.
 Each program is naturally separated, and this was the prime intention of
 creating GoboLinux in the first place.
\layout Standard

The historical reason why Unix systems have some of its tree directly at
 the root partition (
\family typewriter 
/bin
\family default 
, 
\family typewriter 
/lib
\family default 
, 
\family typewriter 
/sbin
\family default 
) as opposed to having it under 
\family typewriter 
/usr
\family default 
, is because this way you can boot in a bare-bones single-user rescue mode
 using those files only, in order to fix problems in the 
\family typewriter 
/usr
\family default 
 tree.
 This is arcane.
 When I need to rescue my system, I can use a fully-featured live CD that
 runs a complete Linux distribution with a graphical desktop, that allows
 me to browse the web and search for the solution to my problem, and use
 all of the features of a regular system to fix it.
 I understand the rationale for having a bare-bones rescue mode decades
 ago, but we have a better solution in our hands now.
\layout Standard

The distinction between 
\family typewriter 
bin
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
sbin
\family default 
 makes no sense, in the present context.
 Historical evolution led to crazy arbitrary distinctions, like 
\family typewriter 
ping
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
traceroute
\family default 
 lying in different directories (I fail to see how can they be of distinct
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

program classes
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

, by any measure).
 Unix systems have a permissions system.
 If one wants only the superuser to be able to run a command, then 
\family typewriter 
chmod 700
\family default 
 it.
 I suspect the separation could have been conceived to reduce the number
 of programs in the 
\family typewriter 
$PATH
\family default 
 of regular users.
 In today's Linux systems, having 400 or 500 programs in your 
\family typewriter 
$PATH
\family default 
, does not make any difference.
\layout Standard

There is one last argument, however, that is still valid for Linux systems
 to day: partitioning and remote mounting.
 Those two are really different shades of the same color, with remote mounting
 being, to my eyes, the most valid concern of those two.
 I've seen arguments about this among the lines of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

hard drives today are cheap, and you'll most likely have all software installed
 locally anyway, for performance
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

.
 I agree with this, but I also understand the ones who'd like to maintain
 things centralized for administrative purposes.
 But imposing additional complexity on the overall system because of one
 particular scenario is usually not a good thing, and even then, the traditional
 Unix solution is not general enough: what if you have three or four application
 servers? You'll mount one at 
\family typewriter 
/usr
\family default 
, one at 
\family typewriter 
/opt
\family default 
, and then what? There goes the traditional Unix tree.
 In fact, in most of the larger Unix networks I had contact with, particular
 needs of the site configuration led to non-standard directories added to
 the Unix tree.
\layout Standard

Fortunately, like with the live CD, we have nowadays a technological advancement
 that serves as a real solution to the problem: 
\emph on 
union mounts
\emph default 
, also known as 
\emph on 
overlay filesystems
\emph default 
.
 The idea is that you can mount several partitions in the same directory.
 This way, the semantics of 
\family typewriter 
/Programs
\family default 
 as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

the collection of all programs available in the system
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 is retained, independently of the physical location of the actual data.
 File systems are all about abstraction (we don't refer to files based on
 their track, sector and cylinder address), this progresses a step further.
 Overlay filesystems are very flexible: the sysadmin, for example, can overlay
 site-specific settings for an application on top of the defaults exported
 over NFS.
 Unfortunately, it is not in widespread use, for reasons beyond by understanding.
 The Plan 9 operating system has it as one of its basic filesystem operations:
 the 
\family typewriter 
bind
\family default 
 command (in Plan 9, for example, you don't need a 
\family typewriter 
$PATH
\family default 
 variable, because all directories containing executables are 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

bound
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 in a single directory).
 There is an implementation of an overlay filesystem for Linux: 
\family typewriter 
ovlfs
\family default 
.
\layout Section*

The alleged user-friendliness of longer names
\layout Standard

Many, many people, when they stumble upon GoboLinux, look at the long, descripti
ve directory names and say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Look! They changed the Linux directory names by making them longer and descripti
ve to make the system friendly!
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

.
 There is some people who say this as if this were a good thing, and some
 people who say this as if this were a bad thing.
 Both are wrong.
\layout Standard

There is a number of reasons why the names in GoboLinux are the way they
 are, and none of them is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

to attract new users who are scared by 
\family typewriter 
/etc
\family default 
 and the like
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

.
 The number one reason is: to not conflict with the Unix namespace.
 And when I say Unix namespace I actually mean the Linux namespace, which
 is not a very well settled thing.
 This is not like a set of reserved keywords from a programming language
 that says not to use 
\family typewriter 
if
\family default 
, 
\family typewriter 
while
\family default 
, 
\family typewriter 
repeat
\family default 
, etc.
 as variable names and the rest is okay.
 You never know what directories, files and programs will show up tomorrow,
 so the best I could do was to pick names that were very unlikely to be
 ever used.
 Others did that before me, and that worked, so I followed their example:
 NeXT and Mac OS X had to make their own directories coexist with Unix directori
es, so they capitalized the names, and while they were at it, they used
 full words instead of abbreviations.
 The abbreviations were a sign of the times from the origins of Unix.
 Dennis Ritchie once said that if he could go back in time and change only
 one thing in Unix, he'd rename the 
\family typewriter 
creat
\family default 
 system call to 
\family typewriter 
create
\family default 
.
\layout Standard

The one thing that reassures me that my decision was right is that, when
 we started with GoboLinux, back in the days of Linux 2.4.something, someone
 asked me 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

why didn't you pick 
\family typewriter 
/sys
\family default 
 instead of 
\family typewriter 
/System
\family default 
? That would be easier to type
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

.
 You can guess what would have happened, now that the kernel guys reserved
 
\family typewriter 
/sys
\family default 
 for their own use.
 In fact, the concerns on typing-friendliness always comes up in discussions
 about the GoboLinux tree.
 To that, I can only respond that, in a properly configured shell like the
 one that comes by default with GoboLinux, typing 
\family typewriter 
/Programs
\family default 
 takes the exact same number of keystrokes as typing 
\family typewriter 
/usr
\family default 
: slash, lowercase 
\family typewriter 
p
\family default 
, Tab.
\layout Standard

One could also ask: but why change the directories, for starters? Why not
 simply use the regular directory tree and make it behave like GoboLinux?
 Yes, I suspect it could be possible, but from an operating system design
 standpoint, I don't like the idea.
 I am not comfortable with the concept of a system where well-known directories
 have different semantics to those that most people expect.
 AtheOS, for example, has this problem.
 You see a 
\family typewriter 
/usr
\family default 
 directory, but that is no 
\family typewriter 
/usr
\family default 
.
 In AtheOS, it behaves more like 
\family typewriter 
/opt
\family default 
, but unexplicably keeping the name that historically stood for 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

user
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 and then was turned into a backronym for Unix System Resources.
 Even if Kurt Skauen called it 
\family typewriter 
/opt
\family default 
, it would still be strange; those are not 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

optional packages
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

The GoboLinux directories, too, have different semantics from the Unix directori
es.
 
\family typewriter 
/Pro\SpecialChar \-
grams
\family default 
 is the collection of all programs available in the system, where each subdirect
ory contains all files from a given program (the distinction of a program
 package is up to the developers of each project; the various tools from
 
\family typewriter 
CoreUtils
\family default 
 form a single program).
 Each subdirectory in /System/Links contains a 
\emph on 
view
\emph default 
 (in the database sense of the term) of each file class from the programs
 collection: libraries, executables, headers, and so on
\begin_inset Foot
collapsed true

\layout Standard

On Plan 9 that could be done with a 
\family typewriter 
bind
\family default 
 command; since we don't have this in a vanilla Linux kernel, we do this
 with symbolic links.
 But I have to admit I like the notion that the views are stored in a persistent
 manner.
\end_inset 

.
 You see, these directories are not the Unix directories, they function
 differently, from an administrative point of view.
 I believe it is good design to make this explicit in the names.
\layout Standard

For strict compatibility reasons, however, we have an extra set of symbolic
 links with the Unix names pointing to the closest GoboLinux equivalents
 (even making a few concessions in the GoboLinux side of the equation in
 order to preserve this compatibility).
 The fact that these are links, and we call them the 
\emph on 
legacy
\emph default 
 tree keeps this notion very clear.
 The work of Lucas Villa-Real and Felipe Damasio on GoboHide, the kernel
 patch for true hidden directories on Linux, further isolates the legacy
 tree as an isolated accessory.
\layout Section*

Do you want to change the standard?
\layout Standard

Of course not.
 For starters, we're not that naive to think that we could.
 But the actual reason why we don't want to change the standard is because
 we believe 
\emph on 
there should be no standard
\emph default 
.
 I know this statement may sound even bolder than talking about changing
 a standard, but the reason I say that is because we believe it is the duty
 of each application to allow itself to be installed anywhere and to accept
 that other applications it needs to work with may be installed anywhere
 (more on this in the next section).
 Now, if there was a standard stating this, I'd even sign a petition to
 support it.
 In fact, there is: the GNU release standards, when they recommend the usage
 of GNU Autotools, supporting the 
\family typewriter 
--prefix
\family default 
 family of switches, and probing for the location of applications with the
 configure script, do just that.
 But when a proposed standard like the FHS gives me an arbitrary list of
 binaries that should be, for unexplained reasons, in a separate directory,
 I laugh at that.
\layout Standard

Different situations imply different needs, and so-called standards that
 attempt to fit every feet in the same shoe are doomed to failure.
 Standardize on flexibility instead.
 That's not we don't propose the GoboLinux tree as a standard to be followed
 by anyone else.
 In five, ten or twenty years, we may have completely different needs from
 the ones we have today.
 I don't want that the move away from the GoboLinux tree then to be as hard
 as the move away from the traditional Unix tree is today.
 Which leads us naturally to our next section...
\layout Section*

An uphill battle to change all applications
\layout Standard

This is not as hard as it seems.
 Before the first version of GoboLinux was fully built, I had already worked
 on and improved this model for about a whole year.
 When André Detsch and I got around to build, in two days, a system from
 scratch built around those concepts, I already knew that this was perfectly
 feasible.
\layout Standard

I work in an university environment, and I have for many years.
 There, I am not the superuser, so I have to install every extra app I need
 in my 
\family typewriter 
$HOME
\family default 
 directory.
 This is a perfectly common situation, it is expected that any decent applicatio
n will allow this, and the vast majority of them do.
 In fact, one could argue that an app that doesn't has a broken build system.
 If you can install Gimp on 
\family typewriter 
/usr
\family default 
, or 
\family typewriter 
/opt
\family default 
, or 
\family typewriter 
/home/hisham
\family default 
, then you can install it on 
\family typewriter 
/Programs/Gimp/2.0/
\family default 
.
 Experience has shown that very few applications need to have their Makefiles
 dissected in order to cooperate.
 Even superuser-oriented software has (or should have) this flexibility:
 in a regular Unix system, the superuser should have the option to choose
 between, say, 
\family typewriter 
/sbin
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
/usr/sbin
\family default 
.
 There is no reason to have hardcoded paths in programs and installers
\begin_inset Foot
collapsed true

\layout Standard

An installer per se is a rare concept in Linux; what I mean by installer
 here is usually the 
\family typewriter 
install
\family default 
 target of a Makefile.
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

A more delicate problem arises when a program, even though it allows itself
 to be installed under any directory, wrongly assumes that another programs
 it depends on is installed under the same directory.
 As you can guess, this is a major source of problems for GoboLinux, but
 I advocate this needs to be fixed for the benefit of the entire free software
 community.
 Let's return to the 
\family typewriter 
$HOME
\family default 
 directory scenario.
 What if my favorite GNOME component was not installed by the system administrat
or, and I want to install it in my 
\family typewriter 
$HOME
\family default 
, while still using the rest of GNOME installed at 
\family typewriter 
/usr
\family default 
? Situations like this, especially in big multi-component software, is often
 problematic.
 There is a number of programs that solve this problem using a 
\family typewriter 
$PATH
\family default 
-like environment variable: 
\family typewriter 
$GTKPATH
\family default 
, 
\family typewriter 
$PERL5LIB
\family default 
, 
\family typewriter 
$KDEDIRS
\family default 
, 
\family typewriter 
$PYTHON_PATH
\family default 
, and so on.
 There is no reason to make a monolithic installation a requirement.
\layout Standard

So, the battle GoboLinux is fighting with regard to installation paths is
 not specific to us; we are only exposing problems on the flexibility of
 installation of applications, that happen not only in our tree, but anywhere
 a user has a custom installation need.
 I see that the situation has improved greatly in the last few years, with
 more and more projects adopting GNU Autotools.
\layout Section*


\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

It's easier to compile all programs relative to the same tree
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Sure it is.
 This is a point that comes up from time to time on the GoboLinux mailing
 list, when people suggest us to either model 
\family typewriter 
/System/Links
\family default 
 after a regular Unix tree, with subdirectories such as 
\family typewriter 
bin
\family default 
, 
\family typewriter 
lib
\family default 
, etc., or just compile everything relative to 
\family typewriter 
/usr
\family default 
 and let the legacy tree ensure that everything keeps working.
 People who suggest this are also implicitly suggesting one of two things:
 to compile relative to a tree and then install relative to another; or
 to compile relative to a tree and then use a redirection hack on installation.
 I don't like any of the two approaches.
 In the first one, you are expecting a certain flexibility from the build
 system that is not always there, but unlike the points I raised on the
 previous section, it is not justifiable that this flexibility 
\emph on 
should
\emph default 
 be in the application's build system in the first place
\begin_inset Foot
collapsed true

\layout Standard

For those interested in this approach, I point you to GNU Stow.
 I do not know, however, of any system built 100% with it, though.
\end_inset 

.
 As for the second approach, I don't like the idea of an operating system
 built around a hack that can be at any moment circumvented by a new system
 call or some unorthodox access method.
 Some might say that GoboHide, for example, also falls in this 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

low-level hack
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 territory.
 I point out, then, that GoboHide is not mandatory: GoboLinux is designed
 to work with a vanilla Linux kernel
\begin_inset Foot
collapsed true

\layout Standard

If it were not, we could also, for example, build the 
\family typewriter 
/System/Links
\family default 
 views as union mounts using 
\family typewriter 
ovlfs
\family default 
.
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

But instead of pointing flaws in the proposed alternatives, I'd prefer to
 constructively defend my original design decision.
 Our idea, with GoboLinux, is to exercise this new approach with self-contained
 directories and assess its impact on system management, and we have been
 collecting exciting results.
 If instead we just used every possible stratagem to make apps 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

easier to compile
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

, I believe we would be detracting ourselves from this goal.
 When I run 
\family typewriter 
ls -l /System/Links/Executables
\family default 
 and see 
\emph on 
all
\emph default 
 executables from my system, and the programs they belong to, I see a clean
 system design.
 I would hate to look at 
\family typewriter 
/System/Links
\family default 
 (or whatever the directory would be called) and see within the Unix mess
 emulated, with 
\family typewriter 
/bin
\family default 
, 
\family typewriter 
/sbin
\family default 
, and (
\family typewriter 
$DEITY
\family default 
 forbid!) 
\family typewriter 
/usr/X11R6
\family default 
.
\layout Section*


\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

You want to turn Linux into a Windows-like!
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

If you read everything up to this point, I believe it should be clear enough
 that we're not.
 If we were doing this to attract the Windows users, a structural reorganization
 would be the last thing we would do.
 Instead, we would concentrate on making the user interface look like Windows,
 applying Windows-like themes, moving icons around, perhaps integrating
 Wine tightly into the distribution, and so on.
 And that's what Lindows, Lindash, Linspire, or whatever their name is today
 is doing, not us.
\layout Standard

It may sound extremely paradoxical, but we strive to keep the Linux identity
 on the system.
 To be more precise, we strive for each project to keep its own identity.
 Whenever possible, we ship every application with unmodified sources.
 If you ever took the time to look inside the 
\family typewriter 
.src.rpm
\family default 
 files of any major distribution, you know what I'm talking about: the vast
 majority of packages have patches to apply little modifications here and
 there to modify this and that behavior; be it to change the default state
 of a checkbox, or even to remove the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

About
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 box of an application! We don't do that.
 Our K menu shows the KDE logo, and so does the KDE splash screen.
 We do ship a theme with a custom wallpaper, but that is presented as an
 option in the installer.
\layout Standard

We go through great distances to ensure that our packages do not have GoboLinux-
specific bugs.
 The worst thing as a Linux user is to discover that a given software works
 on distro X and doesn't on distro Y, and not know if that is because distro
 Y introduced a custom patch that caused the bug, or if it's because distro
 X introduced a patch that fixed the bug.
 Speaking now as a developer, this is also a major headache.
 Alexandre Julliard from Wine once said that the constant changes on Linux
 distributions slow down the project more than the changes from the Win32
 API.
\layout Standard

The fact that on GoboLinux all Unix library directories present all libraries
 from the system, all header directories present all headers, and so on,
 neutralizes many common compatibility problems between distributions, causing
 us to be, ironically, one of the most compatible distros, despite the unorthodo
x directory layout.
\layout Section*

The scope of a distribution
\layout Standard

Some people, perhaps excited by the fact that we made such a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

big change
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 in the structure of the operating system, occasionaly come to us through
 the mailing list with this great idea about doing some other big system-wide
 change that would improve GoboLinux considerably.
 Sometimes this great idea is applicable, and we do apply them, like when
 Carlo Calica integrated a daemon managing tool, 
\family typewriter 
Runit
\family default 
, into GoboLinux
\begin_inset Foot
collapsed true

\layout Standard

The current trend on GoboLinux development is to loosen this integration,
 making 
\family typewriter 
Runit
\family default 
 an optional component, but still providing the required framework to make
 it work.
\end_inset 

.
 But most of the time the idea is something that would require all applications
 to be greatly modified, if not rewritten.
 That is, obviously, something we can't and are not willing to do.
 If we were talking about a limited number of programs, some of them might
 even be feasible, but people need to keep in mind that the universe of
 programs to be used with GoboLinux is potentially infinite, as new Linux
 apps are written every day.
\layout Standard

To list just a few of the unfeasible ideas we were suggested, I could mention:
\layout Itemize

make all programs relocatable -- I would love to see that, but that would
 either mean: rewrite every app in the world to use 
\family typewriter 
libprefix
\family default 
, store every dependency inside each program directory and have some libraries
 on disk one hundred times (and deal with the clashes that arise in a system
 that is not prepared for this), compile everything relative to the same
 tree (I devoted an entire section above for this).
\layout Itemize

make all programs use a unified configuration file format -- Of course,
 the rewrite effort that this would require is even greater than the one
 from the previous item.
 Every idea that starts with 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

make all programs...
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 tends to have the same problems: the effort is potentially infinite; you
 can't make every project in the world agree to use your solution; even
 if you could, there are many legacy systems out there that just can't change
 even if they wanted, so incompatibility issues would happen no matter what.
 Another idea of this class would be to make all programs use the same graphic
 toolkit.
 Yeah, that would look great and unify the Linux desktop, but it's just
 not going to happen.
\layout Itemize

turn entries on 
\family typewriter 
/Programs
\family default 
 into AppDirs, because they look so much like RiscOS -- They may look like,
 but they are pretty different.
 Yes, 
\family typewriter 
/Programs/Emacs
\family default 
 could be made into an AppDir.
 
\family typewriter 
/Programs/LyX
\family default 
 too.
 Hey, a lot of them could.
 But what about 
\family typewriter 
/Programs/FindUtils
\family default 
? Or 
\family typewriter 
/Programs/KDE
\family default 
, what would happen when you click on that? Another key issue is that AppDirs
 are relocatable by nature and GoboLinux packages are not, a problem which
 I already covered above.
\layout Section*

Internationalization
\layout Standard

An often raised point is that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

changing
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 names from things like 
\family typewriter 
lib
\family default 
 to things like 
\family typewriter 
Libraries
\family default 
 is too English-centric (
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

at least the old names were equally meaningless for everyone
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

) and that we should do an effort to make the directory tree translatable.
 I could dismiss this point raising a number of technical issues that make
 this impractical, unless we are talking about hacks involving symbolic
 links and the GoboHide kernel patch.
 But I won't do that.
 I will, instead, assume that a clean and elegant way to translate all GoboLinux
 directories existed, and ask 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

then what?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

If people are willing to translate the directory tree in order to make the
 system more friendly to those who don't speak English, I'm sorry, but that
 won't help.
 A user that is defeated by the fact that 
\family typewriter 
/System/Settings
\family default 
 is not called 
\family typewriter 
/Sistema/Configurações
\family default 
 won't go very farther, once they reach this directory and need to edit
 
\family typewriter 
httpd.conf
\family default 
.
 The point I am trying to make is that the kind of users that need international
ization won't be helped by a translated directory tree.
 Efforts for translation should instead be directed towards documentation
 and the user interface of programs.
 If the user can read a manual in his/her language that tells him/her to
 go to 
\family typewriter 
/System/Settings
\family default 
 and do such and such change in 
\family typewriter 
httpd.conf
\family default 
, this is much more useful than having the name of the directory changed.
 If the user has a friendly GUI for configuring Apache like the one provided
 by Mac OS X, he/she will probably like it much more.
\layout Section*

Integration with other distros 
\layout Standard

This is another point that is raised from time to time, in different shapes,
 sizes and colors.
 The one reason I see people leaning towards this idea is because of the
 huge libraries of ready-to-use software provided by the other distributions.
 At first sight, the idea of combining all the innovations of GoboLinux
 with the enormous package base of distro X seems amazing.
 Looking closer, we'll see it's not.
\layout Standard

First of all, there is the issue of the dependency systems.
 GoboLinux has a very loose dependency system, designed to be resilient
 to user customizations
\begin_inset Foot
collapsed true

\layout Standard

It's beyond the scope of this article to describe the GoboLinux dependency
 system, but for example, if you install app A and it depends on B, it won't
 complain if B was not installed with a vanilla package, and if B is missing,
 it will report, but not refuse to install.
\end_inset 

.
 If you take advantage of these GoboLinux features, you won't be able to
 auto-update system of distro X, and vice-versa.
 This way, you would have to choose between using GoboLinux as if you were
 using distro X, giving up much of the GoboLinux flexibility, or ignoring
 the cool auto-update features from distro X.
 Either way, you would give up on one of the reasons you started this integratio
n project in the first place.
\layout Standard

Then, there are all of the little peculiarities of both distributions, which
 you would have to be constantly dealing with: different boot scripts, possible
 library incompatibilities, the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

value-added
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 package customizations of distro X...
 Not to mention the inability to properly use Compile or the GoboLinux binaries
 repository, due to, for example, different naming conventions of packages.
\layout Standard

In short, even if you convert a whole system to use distro X's packages,
 what you'll end up with is not a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

turbo
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 GoboLinux, but a quirky distro X.
 It is trivial to take, for example, all RPM's that compose a RedHat system,
 unpack them, and symlink them to look like a GoboLinux system.
 The resulting system, in the end, would pretty much be still RedHat.
 Different people have done this, with different goals (some to build a
 full distro, others just to convert a binary package or two), with RedHat,
 Slackware, Debian and more recently Gentoo.
 The general lesson I learned, from watching them do it, is that it is not
 worth it.
\layout Section*

The 
\family typewriter 
root
\family default 
 user
\layout Standard

Of course, I saved the best for last.
 The decision of naming user zero something other than 
\family typewriter 
root
\family default 
 is among the ones we are most criticized for.
 The origins of this predate GoboLinux.
 On my experimental system, my regular user was named 
\family typewriter 
hisham
\family default 
, and the superuser 
\family typewriter 
lode
\family default 
.
 I never liked the Unix notion of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

an arbitrary 
\family typewriter 
root
\family default 
 versus regular users
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 and wanted to see how well a Linux system would behave without a 
\family typewriter 
root
\family default 
 user.
 After a few adaptations here and there, it worked very well.
 It was nice to know that every time someone would try to log as 
\family typewriter 
root
\family default 
 in my machine, they would always fail.
\layout Standard

When we made the hackathon that resulted in the first version of GoboLinux,
 André and I decided to keep doing it.
 We chose 
\family typewriter 
gobo
\family default 
, an inside joke.
 The intention of course, was to have a system that could support a non-
\family typewriter 
root
\family default 
 superuser cleanly, but the users (a handful of people back then) never
 changed the default and 
\family typewriter 
gobo
\family default 
 somehow got stuck.
 It is still possible to change the default without much effort, though.
 For a short while I administered a set of machines at the university, and,
 to have them blend with the NIS environment more easily (the network was
 basically composed of RedHat boxes), I changed the superuser from 
\family typewriter 
gobo
\family default 
 back to 
\family typewriter 
root
\family default 
.
 Now that GoboLinux has a graphical installer, we are considering putting
 the superuser name as an installation-time option.
\layout Standard

Now that I'm through with the historical explanation, one thing I would
 like to point out that it is a well-known fact that the existence of a
 single god-like entity is one of the weaknesses of the Linux security model,
 and that is what bothered me with the notion of an arbitrary 
\family typewriter 
root
\family default 
 versus the rest of users; it is akin to a single point of failure in a
 distributed system.
 The first thing every project aiming to improve the security of Linux does
 is to increase the granularity of the security model, do dilute the power
 of 
\family typewriter 
root
\family default 
: ACLs, capabilities, SELinux...
 It may be argued that some of those add excessive complexity to the model,
 but I won't dive into this discussion here.
 The one thing that is clear is that the 
\family typewriter 
root
\family default 
 model is overly simplistic for today's complex systems, and that the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

setuid
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 kludge is the source of most security issues.
 Plan 9, for example, doesn't have a superuser at all; it offers a virtualized
 view of the file system to each process.
 The 
\family typewriter 
gobo
\family default 
 experiment was an interesting assessment on how ingrained in the Linux
 world is the expectation on having a 
\family typewriter 
root
\family default 
 user; fortunately, not much (it does not measure how attached the security
 model is to the user #0, of course).
 One future direction I would like GoboLinux to take (and in fact Linux
 in general) is to adopt some of the technologies listed above as a way
 to improve the control over the system security and administration; to
 detach ourselves from 
\family typewriter 
root
\family default 
 was the first step in this direction.
\layout Section*

Conclusions
\layout Standard

Well, I believe I covered a lot of ground in this article.
 I'm sure I forgot many issues, but I think the most important ones are
 all here.
 But the main idea I hope I passed here is that GoboLinux is not just a
 cosmetic change in the filesystem.
 We are pretty much aware of what we are doing, and what are the implications
 of the things we are doing.
\layout Standard

It is no secret that when I came up with the first versions of this directory
 layout, I did not expect it to turn into a Linux distribution used by people
 all around the world (even though it was shaped as a distribution project
 as early as when Guilherme Bedin joined).
 The one thing I'm most happy about is that the original goal, from way
 back when it was not a proper distro, remains: a clean design.
\layout Standard

I wholeheartedly agree with the quote in the beginning of the article, and
 I definitely believe this is not the case.
 
\the_end
